(#563) Add documentation about hooks (#564)
chocolatey/docs: input/en-us/features/hook.md

---
Order: 75
xref: hooks
Title: Extend Chocolatey With PowerShell Scripts (Hooks)
Description: Run PowerShell before and after Package Automation Scripts
---

A feature is available in Chocolatey CLI v1.2.0, which allows you to extend a package's automation script(s) with additional PowerShell scripts, called hooks. 

## Overview

> Hooks allow you to run code before a package automation script like a `chocolateyInstall.ps1` runs, or after. They even work when automation scripts are not included in the package. Each script can selectively target a single package ID, or run for all packages. Then distribute them using `.hook` packages.

Reviewer: This last sentence feels a little out of place.

```suggestion
Hooks allow you to run code before a package automation script like a `chocolateyInstall.ps1` runs, or after. They even work when automation scripts are not included in the package. Each script can selectively target a single package ID, or run for all packages. Then they can be distributed using `.hook` packages.
```

Author: Yup, change looks good.

## Creating Hook Scripts

> Hook script are PowerShell `.ps1` files, and are run in the same environment as package automation scripts are, so they can access all the same environment variables and helpers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hook scripts are PowerShell `.ps1` files, and are run in the same environment as package automation scripts run, so they have access to all of the same environment variables and helpers. 
```

Author: Fixed

> The conditions for when a hook is run is based on the filename of the hook. `<pre|post>-<install|beforemodify|uninstall>-<packageID|all>.ps1` is the filename format. The first section is for timing of when the hook script runs. Filenames that start with `pre` run before the package automation script (e.g. the `chocolateyInstall.ps1`), while `post` scripts are run afterwards. The second section of the filename determines which package automation script the hook is run before or after. The third section of the filename is either a string of the package ID for which the hook should be run, or the keyword `all` to specify that the hook should be run for all package IDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The conditions for when a hook is run is based on the filename of the hook. The filename format is `<pre|post>-<install|beforemodify|uninstall>-<packageID|all>.ps1`. The first section is for the timing of when the hook script runs. Filenames that start with `pre` run before the package automation script (e.g. the `chocolateyInstall.ps1`), while filenames that start with `post` are run afterwards. The second section of the filename determines which package automation script the hook is run before or after. The third section of the filename is either a string of the package ID for which the hook should be run, or the keyword `all` to specify that the hook should be run for all package IDs.
```

Author: Fixed

If a package does not contain a `chocolateyInstall.ps1`, but a `pre-install-all.ps1` hook is installed, then that hook will still run at the point in the package install as the `chocolateyInstall.ps1` would have been run if the package had included it. 

## Creating Hook Packages

Hooks can be installed just like extensions, via a specific package type, namely `.hook`. The name of the installed hook folder is the package id, minus the `.hook`.

How to create a Hook package:
1. Create a package with a `.hook` suffix like `choco new name.hook`
1. Delete the created files and folders except for the `.nuspec`
1. Create a `hook` folder in the root of the package (next to the `.nuspec`).
1. Put your hook PowerShell script files inside the `hook` folder.
1. Pack and install your new Hook package.

## Recommenations

> ## Still under development

Reviewer: This is supposed to be a subheading of Recommendations right?

```suggestion
### Still under development
```

Author: Fixed

Hook scripts and packages are still new, so guidelines and best practices are still being determined. Follow along at the [Chocolatey Community Hooks Repository](https://github.com/chocolatey-community/chocolatey-hooks) for the latest information.

> ## Avoid taking dependencies on regular packages

Reviewer: This is supposed to be a subheading of Recommendations right?

```suggestion
### Avoid taking dependencies on regular packages
```

Author: Fixed

It is best to avoid having a `.hook` package taking a dependency on regular packages. This is so the included hooks from the package can be installed before other packages get initially installed. For example, if there is a `pre-install-git.ps1` hook and the `.hook` package it is included in takes a dependency on `git`, then the `chocolateyInstall.ps1` from the `git` package would have already run before the hook is installed, which is counterproductive.

> ## Do take dependencies on extension packages

Reviewer: This is supposed to be a subheading of Recommendations right?

```suggestion
### Do take dependencies on extension packages
```

Author: Fixed
